z230.md, before:

Python 0-30 for Scientists
==========================

This is an outline of the steps needed to teach Python 0-30.  The plan is to teach
Python in an example-based way demonstrating:

1. How to write Python code
1. Python best-practices
1. Coding with git & GitHub

with each being of equal importance.  This means that we intend to:

1. Use "the right" data structures for the intended task, without needed to depend upon external 3rd-party packages.
1. Commit early and commit often, so that each "lesson" is represented by a single git commit.
1. End the instruction with an installable package and demonstrate the usefulness of such packages.

Requirements & Assumptions
--------------------------

- Assumes a linux/mac OS
- Requires git (can get from conda)
- Requires python3 (can get from conda)

Outline
-------

1. Create a directory: 
   ```bash
   $ mkdir mysci
   ```
1. Go into the directory:  
   ```bash
   $ cd mysci
   ```
1. Make the directory a git repository:
   ```bash
   $ git init .
   ```
1. Create a data directory:  
   ```bash
   $ mkdir data
   ```
1. Go into the data directory:  
   ```bash
   $ cd data
   ```
1. Download sample data:  
   ```bash
   $ curl -O https://sundowner.colorado.edu/weather/atoc8/wxobs20170821.txt
   ```
1. Add the file to the *git staging area*:
   ```bash
   $ git add wxobs20170821.txt
   ```
1. Commit the file to the *git repository*:
   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding sample data file"
   ```
1. Go back to the top-level directory:
   ```bash
   $ cd ..
   ```
1. Create a blank Python script:
   ```bash
   $ touch mysci.py
   ```
1. Edit the `mysci.py` file:
   ```python
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:
       data = datafile.read()
   print(data)
   ```
1. Try testing the script:
   ```bash
   $ python mysci.py
   ```
1. Add the script to the git staging area:
   ```bash
   $ git add mysci.py
   ```
1. Commit the file to the *git repository*:
   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding script file"
   ```

Commit message:

Adding conda steps, notes, etc.

z230.md, after:

Python 0-30 for Scientists
==========================

This is an outline of the steps needed to teach Python 0-30.  The plan is to teach
Python in an example-based way demonstrating:

1. How to write Python code
1. Python best-practices
1. Coding with git & GitHub

with each being of equal importance.  This means that we intend to:

1. Use "the right" data structures for the intended task, without needed to depend upon external 3rd-party packages.
1. Commit early and commit often, so that each "lesson" is represented by a single git commit.
1. End the instruction with an installable package and demonstrate the usefulness of such packages.

Requirements & Assumptions
--------------------------

- Assumes a linux/mac OS
- Requires git (can get from conda)
- Requires python3 (can get from conda)

Outline
-------

1. [bash] Create a directory:
   ```bash
   $ mkdir mysci
   ```
1. [bash] Go into the directory:
   ```bash
   $ cd mysci
   ```
1. [git] Make the directory a git repository:
   ```bash
   $ git init .
   ```
1. [conda] Create a virtual environment for this project:
   ```bash
   $ conda create --name mysci python
   ```
   **NOTE:** This installs `python` into a conda environment called `mysci`.
1. [bash] Create a data directory:
   ```bash
   $ mkdir data
   ```
1. [bash] Go into the data directory:
   ```bash
   $ cd data
   ```
1. [bash] Download sample data:
   ```bash
   $ curl -O https://sundowner.colorado.edu/weather/atoc8/wxobs20170821.txt
   ```
1. [git] Add the file to the *git staging area*:
   ```bash
   $ git add wxobs20170821.txt
   ```
1. [git] Commit the file to the *git repository*:
   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding sample data file"
   ```
1. [bash] Go back to the top-level directory:
   ```bash
   $ cd ..
   ```
1. [bash] Create a blank Python script:
   ```bash
   $ touch mysci.py
   ```
1. [python] Edit the `mysci.py` file:
   ```python
   print("Hello, world!")
   ```
1. [python] Try testing the script:
   ```bash
   $ python mysci.py
   ```
1. [python] Now delete the `print("Hello, world!")` line from the `mysci.py`
   file and change it with the following:
   ```python
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:
       data = datafile.read()
   print(data)
   ```
1. [python] Try testing the script, again:
   ```bash
   $ python mysci.py
   ```
1. [git] Add the script to the git staging area:
   ```bash
   $ git add mysci.py
   ```
1. [git] Commit the file to the *git repository*:
   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding script file"
   ```
