z230-pt2.md, before:

Python 0-30
===========

Outline - Part 2 - Second Python Script
---------------------------------------

1. [bash] Let's make a copy of our first script.
   
   ```bash
   $ cp windchillcomp.py heatindexcomp.py
   ```

1. [git] And add and commit this new file.
   (`git commit -m "Copying first script to start second"`)

1. [python] Now, we want to compute the Heat Index, which we
   will do by replacing the `compute_windchill` function with
   a `compute_heatindex` function:
   
   ```python
   # Compute the heat index
   def compute_heatindex(temp, hum):
       T = temp
       H = hum / 100
       HI = (-42.379 + 2.04901523*T + 10.14333127*H -
             0.22475541*T*H - 6.83783e-3*T**2 - 5.481717e-2*H**2 +
             1.22874e-3*T**2*H + 8.5282e-4*T*H**2 -
             1.99e-6*T**2*H**2)
       return HI
   ```
   
   Then, we need to change the columns we read from the data file:
   
   ```python
   columns = {'date': 0, 'time': 1, 'tempout': 2, 'humout': 5,
              'heatindex': 13}
   ```
   
   and
   
   ```python
    types = {'tempout': float, 'humout': float, 'heatindex': float}
   ```

   and then we update the rest of the script to match
   
   ```python
   # Let's actually compute the heat index
   heatindex = []
   for temp, hum in zip(data['tempout'], data['humout']):
       heatindex.append(compute_heatindex(temp, hum))

   # Output comparison of data
   print('                ORIGINAL  COMPUTED')
   print(' DATE    TIME  HEAT INDX HEAT INDX DIFFERENCE')
   print('------- ------ --------- --------- ----------')
   for date, time, hi_orig, hi_comp in zip(data['date'], data['time'], data['heatindex'], heatindex):
       print(f'{date} {time:>6} {hi_orig:9.6f} {hi_comp:9.6f} {hi_orig-hi_comp:10.6f}')
   ```
   
   Let's run this script and see the results.
   
   **NOTE:** This computation is not too bad!  Pretty close.

1. [git] Stage and commit this new script.
   (`git commit -m "Updating new heat index script"`)

1. [bash] Now, we have two scripts that do very similar things.
   In fact, all of the data reading and parsing code is duplicated!
   And the output is similarly formatted, too.  So, let's fix this
   by creating a *module*.
   
   Create a new file called `readdata.py`:
   
   ```python
   def read_data(columns, types={}, filename="data/wxobs20170821.txt"):
       """
       Read data from CU Boulder Weather Station data file
       
       Parameters:
           columns: A dictionary of column names mapping to column indices
           types: A dictionary of column names mapping to types to which
               to convert each column of data
           filename: The string path pointing to the CU Boulder Weather
               Station data file
       """

       # Initialize my data variable
       data = {}
       for column in columns:
           data[column] = []

       # Read and parse the data file
       with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:

           # Read the first three lines (header)
           for _ in range(3):
               datafile.readline()

           # Read and parse the rest of the file
           for line in datafile:
               split_line = line.split()
               for column in columns:
                   i = columns[column]
                   t = types.get(column, str)
                   value = t(split_line[i])
                   data[column].append(value)

       return data
   ```
   
   **NOTE:** Introduces keyword arguments to functions and
   docstrings!

1. [git] Stage and commit this new file
   (`git commit -m "Adding new readdata module"`)

1. [python] Now, let's amend our two Python scripts by *first* deleting
   the equivalent code in them.
   
   Then, add the following import statement to the top of each script:
   
   ```python
   from readdata import read_data   
   ```
   
   And finally, after the initializations of the `columns` and `types`
   variables, replace the deleted code with a function call.
   
   ```python
   # Read data from file
   data = read_data(columns, types=types)
   ```
   
   Test out both of these scripts to make sure they still work!
   
   **NOTE:** Introduces *modules*, the `import` statement
   
1. [git] Do a `git status` now.  Do you notice something new?  Running
   our new scripts created the `__pycache__` directory.  We *don't*
   want to add this directory to our project repository, so before we
   commit anything, let's tell git to ignore it!
   
   Create a new file (in the top-level directory of your project) called
   `.gitignore` with the following contents:
   
   ```text
   __pycache__/
   ```
   
   Do another `git status`.  What do you see?
   
   Now, instead of `__pycache__` being listed as "untracked", you see
   `.gitignore` being listed as "untracked"...and no mention of `__pycache__`.
   
   So, let's stage and commit out new `.gitignore` file.
   (`git commit -m "Ignoring pycache"`)
   
   Finally, do another `git status` to see where we are at.  Notice that
   the edits we made to our two scripts have still not been committed to
   the project repository!  Because we never staged them before our last
   commit.
   
1. [git] Stage *both files* and commit all new changes in one commit
   (`git commit -m "Refactor scripts to use new module"`)

Commit message:

Add mention of help function

z230-pt2.md, after:

Python 0-30
===========

Outline - Part 2 - Second Python Script
---------------------------------------

1. [bash] Let's make a copy of our first script.
   
   ```bash
   $ cp windchillcomp.py heatindexcomp.py
   ```

1. [git] And add and commit this new file.
   (`git commit -m "Copying first script to start second"`)

1. [python] Now, we want to compute the Heat Index, which we
   will do by replacing the `compute_windchill` function with
   a `compute_heatindex` function:
   
   ```python
   # Compute the heat index
   def compute_heatindex(temp, hum):
       T = temp
       H = hum / 100
       HI = (-42.379 + 2.04901523*T + 10.14333127*H -
             0.22475541*T*H - 6.83783e-3*T**2 - 5.481717e-2*H**2 +
             1.22874e-3*T**2*H + 8.5282e-4*T*H**2 -
             1.99e-6*T**2*H**2)
       return HI
   ```
   
   Then, we need to change the columns we read from the data file:
   
   ```python
   columns = {'date': 0, 'time': 1, 'tempout': 2, 'humout': 5,
              'heatindex': 13}
   ```
   
   and
   
   ```python
    types = {'tempout': float, 'humout': float, 'heatindex': float}
   ```

   and then we update the rest of the script to match
   
   ```python
   # Let's actually compute the heat index
   heatindex = []
   for temp, hum in zip(data['tempout'], data['humout']):
       heatindex.append(compute_heatindex(temp, hum))

   # Output comparison of data
   print('                ORIGINAL  COMPUTED')
   print(' DATE    TIME  HEAT INDX HEAT INDX DIFFERENCE')
   print('------- ------ --------- --------- ----------')
   for date, time, hi_orig, hi_comp in zip(data['date'], data['time'], data['heatindex'], heatindex):
       print(f'{date} {time:>6} {hi_orig:9.6f} {hi_comp:9.6f} {hi_orig-hi_comp:10.6f}')
   ```
   
   Let's run this script and see the results.
   
   **NOTE:** This computation is not too bad!  Pretty close.

1. [git] Stage and commit this new script.
   (`git commit -m "Updating new heat index script"`)

1. [bash] Now, we have two scripts that do very similar things.
   In fact, all of the data reading and parsing code is duplicated!
   And the output is similarly formatted, too.  So, let's fix this
   by creating a *module*.
   
   Create a new file called `readdata.py`:
   
   ```python
   def read_data(columns, types={}, filename="data/wxobs20170821.txt"):
       """
       Read data from CU Boulder Weather Station data file
       
       Parameters:
           columns: A dictionary of column names mapping to column indices
           types: A dictionary of column names mapping to types to which
               to convert each column of data
           filename: The string path pointing to the CU Boulder Weather
               Station data file
       """

       # Initialize my data variable
       data = {}
       for column in columns:
           data[column] = []

       # Read and parse the data file
       with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:

           # Read the first three lines (header)
           for _ in range(3):
               datafile.readline()

           # Read and parse the rest of the file
           for line in datafile:
               split_line = line.split()
               for column in columns:
                   i = columns[column]
                   t = types.get(column, str)
                   value = t(split_line[i])
                   data[column].append(value)

       return data
   ```
   
   **NOTE:** Introduces keyword arguments to functions and
   docstrings!  Might also want to mention what `help(read_data)`
   will do with the docstring.

1. [git] Stage and commit this new file
   (`git commit -m "Adding new readdata module"`)

1. [python] Now, let's amend our two Python scripts by *first* deleting
   the equivalent code in them.
   
   Then, add the following import statement to the top of each script:
   
   ```python
   from readdata import read_data   
   ```
   
   And finally, after the initializations of the `columns` and `types`
   variables, replace the deleted code with a function call.
   
   ```python
   # Read data from file
   data = read_data(columns, types=types)
   ```
   
   Test out both of these scripts to make sure they still work!
   
   **NOTE:** Introduces *modules*, the `import` statement
   
1. [git] Do a `git status` now.  Do you notice something new?  Running
   our new scripts created the `__pycache__` directory.  We *don't*
   want to add this directory to our project repository, so before we
   commit anything, let's tell git to ignore it!
   
   Create a new file (in the top-level directory of your project) called
   `.gitignore` with the following contents:
   
   ```text
   __pycache__/
   ```
   
   Do another `git status`.  What do you see?
   
   Now, instead of `__pycache__` being listed as "untracked", you see
   `.gitignore` being listed as "untracked"...and no mention of `__pycache__`.
   
   So, let's stage and commit out new `.gitignore` file.
   (`git commit -m "Ignoring pycache"`)
   
   Finally, do another `git status` to see where we are at.  Notice that
   the edits we made to our two scripts have still not been committed to
   the project repository!  Because we never staged them before our last
   commit.
   
1. [git] Stage *both files* and commit all new changes in one commit
   (`git commit -m "Refactor scripts to use new module"`)
