Python 0-30 for Scientists
==========================

Welcome to the Python 0 to 30 for Scientists tutorial. In this self-paced course you will 
learn how to write Python code using Python best practices. Part 1 was designed to take 
one work day, but you may move through the content much slower or more quickly. Through 
these instructions you will develop scripts and use git and GitHub to save and organize 
your work. At the end of this tutorial you will have a grasp of how to begin building your 
own library of Python tools for your scientific analysis workflows.


Why Python?
-----------
You're already here because you want to learn to use Python for your data analysis and 
visualizations. Python can be compared to other interpreted object-oriented languages, but 
is especially great because it is free and open source! 

Being open source means that when people have identified gaps in Python's abilitlies, they 
have built libraries of code that make those tasks easier. There are libraries specifically 
for improved mathmatics, statistics, plotting, etc -  collections of code that you can use 
without having to build yourself. 

Perhaps you are already familiar with importing libraries into your workflow. In IDL people 
pass around files that contain unique user-written functions -  which achieves this same 
purpose of reducing the amount of redundant work between scientists, but in Python package 
managers help you know what version of those functions you are using. Matlab has packages 
that you can pay extra money to install and use - again Python is free! 

There are many many different libraries of code you can import and use. We are only going 
to teach you the most commonly used libraries, and one at a time in order to reduce any 
confusion you may have about what each library offers.

Part 1 will focus on teaching fundamental git and Python, without any external libraries.


Requirements & Installation
--------------------------

But first, check that you have conda or miniconda installed on your OS. 

1. [bash] Check your conda version:

   ```bash
   $ conda list anaconda
   ```
   At the time of writing this, the latest version of conda is 4.6. If you have an 
   old version of conda installed, update it.

2. [bash] If necessary, update:

   ```bash
   $ conda update
   ```

   If you don't have conda installed at all, please install it. 

   Use the instructions at 
   https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/index.html 

   ***NOTE** If you have a REALLY old version of conda it might be easier to delete it and 
   then reinstall it. But before doing this you have to check your env-list to see if there 
   are any environments you created and want to save.

3. Check your conda version again.

4. Install git

   Git is a program that tracks changes made to files. This makes it easy to maintain access 
   to multiple versions of your code as you improve it, and revert your code back to a 
   previous version if you've made any mistakes.

   Follow instructions at https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git


Part 1a - First Python Script
--------------------------------------

Okay, let's build your first Python script. You will learn about syntax and the reasoning 
behind why things are done the way they along the way.

Open a terminal to begin.

1. [bash] Create a directory:

   ```bash
   $ mkdir NCAR_python_tutorial_2020
   ```

   The first thing we have to do is create a directory to store our work. Let's call it 
   "NCAR_python_tutorial_2020".
   
2. [bash] Go into the directory:

   ```bash
   $ cd NCAR_python_tutorial_2020
   ```

3. [conda] Create a virtual environment for this project:

   ```bash
   $ conda create --name NCAR_python_tutorial_2020 python
   ```

   A conda environment is a directory that contains a collection of packages or libraries 
   that you would like installed and accessible for this workflow. Type "conda create --name", 
   the name of your project, here that is "NCAR_python_tutorial_2020," and then specify that 
   you are using python to create a virtual environment for this project.

   It is a good idea to create new environments for different projects because since Python is 
   open source, new versions of the tools you use  may become available. This is a way of 
   guaranteeing that your script will use the same versions of packages and libraries and should 
   run the same as you expect it to.

4. [git] Make the directory a git repository:

   ```bash
   $ git init .
   ```
   
5. [bash] Create a data directory:

   ```bash
   $ mkdir data
   ```

   And we'll make a directory for our data.

6. [bash] Go into the data directory:

   ```bash
   $ cd data
   ```
   Let's "cd" into the data directory. 

7. [bash] Download sample data:

   ```bash
   $ curl -O https://sundowner.colorado.edu/weather/atoc8/wxobs20170821.txt
   ```

   And download data from the CU Boulder weather station.

   This weather station is a Davis Instruments wireless Vantage Pro2 located on the CU-Boulder 
   east campus at the SEEC building (40.01 N, 05.24 W, 5250 ft elevation). The station is 
   monitored by the Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences (ATOC) department and is part of the larger 
   University of Colorado ATOC Weather Network.
   
8. [git] Add the file to the *git staging area*:

   ```bash
   $ git add wxobs20170821.txt
   ```
   
   By adding this datafile to your directory, you have made a change that is not yet reflected 
   in our Github repository. Type "git add" and then the name of the altered file to stage your 
   change.
   
9. [git] Commit the file to the *git repository*:

   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding sample data file"
   ```
   
   And then with "git commit", update your repository with all the changes you staged, in 
   this case just one file. Let's take a look at our repositories to check this.

10. [git] Look at the git logs:

   ```bash
   $ git log
   ```
   
   If you type "git log" you will show a log of all the commits, or changes made to your 
   repository.

11. [bash] Go back to the top-level directory:

   ```bash
   $ cd ..
   ```

12. [bash] Create a blank Python script:

   ```bash
   $ touch mysci.py
   ```

   And now that you've set up our workspace, create a blank Python script, 
   called "mysci.py"

13. [python] Edit the `mysci.py` file using nano, vim, or your favorite text editor:

   ```python
   print("Hello, world!")
   ```

   Your classic first command will be to print "Hello World".

14. [python] Try testing the script:

   ```bash
   $ python mysci.py
   ```
   
   And test that the script works by typing "python" and then the name of your script. 
   Yay! You've just created your first Python script. 
   
15. [python] Now delete the `print("Hello, world!")` line
   from the `mysci.py` file, and read the first 4 lines from data file.

   Change the `mysci.py` script to read:
   
   ```python
   # Read the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   datafile = open(filename, 'r')

   print(datafile.readline())
   print(datafile.readline())
   print(datafile.readline())
   print(datafile.readline())

   datafile.close()
   ```

   And test your script again by typing:

   ```bash
   $ python mysci.py
   ```

   You probably won't need to run your Hello World script again, so delete it and start over 
   with something more useful - we'll read the first 4 lines from our datafile.
 
   First to open the .txt file you downloaded earlier, create a variable for your datafile name, 
   which is a string - this can be in single or double quotes.

   Then create a variable associated with the opened file, here it is called `datafile`. 
   The `'r'` argument in the `open` command indicates that we are opening the file for reading 
   capabilities. Other input arguments for "open" include `'w'`, for example, if you wanted 
   to write to the file.

   The `readline` command moves through the open file, always reading the next line.

   And remember to `close` your datafile.

   Comments in Python are indicated with a hash, as you can see in the first line 
   `# Read the data file`. Comments are ignored by the interpreter.

   Testing of your script with `python mysci.py` should be done every time you wish to 
   execute the script. This will no longer be specified  as a unique step in between every 
   change to our script.

16. [python] Change the `mysci.py` script to read your whole data file:

   ```python
   # Read the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   datafile = open(filename, 'r')
   data = datafile.read()
   datafile.close()

   # DEBUG
   print(data)
   print('data')
   ```

   Our code is similar to the before, but now we've read the entire file. To test that this 
   worked. We'll `print(data)`. Print statements in python require parenthesis around the 
   object you wish to print, here it is data. Try `print('data')` as well, now Python will 
   print the string `'data'`, as it did for the hello world function, instead of the 
   information stored in the variable `data`.

   on't forget to execute with `python mysci.py`

17. [python] Change the `mysci.py` script to read your whole data file using a context 
   manager `with`:

   ```python
   # Read the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:
      data = datafile.read()
   
   # DEBUG
   print(data)
   ```
   Again this is a similar method of opening the datafile, but we now use `with open`. 
   The `with` statement is a context manager that provides clean-up and assures that the 
   file is automatically closed after you've read it. The tab indendation of the line 
   `data = datafile.read()` is very important. Python is sensitive to white space and 
   will not work if you combine spaces and tabs. Combined these two lines mean: with the 
   datafile opened, I'd like to read it.

   And execute with `python mysci.py`

18. [python] What did we just see?  What is the `data` object?  What
   type is `data`?  How do we find out?  Add the following to the
   `DEBUG` section of our script:
   
   ```python
   print(type(data))
   ```
   And execute with `python mysci.py`

   What did we just see?  What is the `data` object?  In the 'DEBUG' section of our script 
   let's find out the type of our data object. Object types refer to 'float' 'integer' 
   'string' or other types that you can create. 

      Python is a dynamically typed language, which means you don't have to explicitly 
      specify the datatype when you name a variable, Python will automatically figure 
      it out by the nature of the data.

19. [git] Now, clean up the script by removing the `DEBUG`
   section, before we commit this to git.

20. [git] Let's check the status of our git repository

   ```bash
   $ git status
   ```
   
   Note what files have been changed in the repository.

21. [git] Stage these changes:

   ```bash
   $ git add mysci.py
   ```

22. [git] Let's check the status of our git repository,
   again.  What's different from the last time we 
   checked the status?

23. [git] Commit these changes:

   ```bash
   $ git commit -m "Adding script file"
   ```
   Here a good commit message `-m` for our changes would be "Adding script file"

24. [git] Let's check the status of our git repository,
   now.  It should tell you that there are no changes
   made to your repository (i.e., your repository is
   up-to-date with the state of the code in your
   directory).'

25. [git] Look at the git logs, again:

   ```bash
   $ git log
   ```
   You can also print simplified logs with the `--oneline` option.

==========================

Okay that concludes the first lesson of this virtual tutorial. 
You should now be familiar with git, basic python commands (print and open), 
and the string datatype. 

Please continue to part 1b.