Python 0-30 for Scientists
==========================

This is intended to pick off right where part 1b left off- you had just commited your new script that reads the file, saving the variables of date, time, and tempout in a data dictionary.

Part 1c - First Python Script Cont
--------------------------------------

38. [python] Okay, now that you've read the data in a way that
   is easy to modify later, it is time to actually do something with
   the data.
   
   Compute the *wind chill* factor, which is the cooleing effect of the wind. As wind speed increases the rate at which a body loses heat increases. The formula for this is:
   
   WCI = a + (b * Temperature) - (c * WindSpeed^2) + (d * Temperature * WindSpeed^2)

   Where WCI referes to the Wind Chill in degrees F, Temperature is in degrees F, WindSpeed is in mph, and the other variables are as follows: a = 35.74, b = 0.6215, c = 35.75, and d = 0.4275. Wind Chill Index is only defined for temperatures within the range -45 to +45 degrees F. 
   
   You've read the temperature data into the `tempout` variable, 
   but to do this calculationyou also need
   to read the `windspeed` variable from column `7`.  
   Modify the `columns` variable to read:
   
   ```python
   columns = {'date': 0, 'time': 1, 'tempout': 2, 'windspeed': 7}
   ```
   
   and modify the `types` variable to be:
   
   ```python
   types = {'tempout': float, 'windspeed': float}
   ```

39. [git] Great!  Save this in your git repo.  Stage and
   commit (`git commit -m "Reading windspeed as well"`).

40. [python] Now, let's write our first function to compute
   the wind chill factor.  We'll add this function to the
   bottom of the file.
   
   ```python
   # Compute the wind chill temperature
   def compute_windchill(temp, windspeed):
      a = 35.74
      b = 0.6215
      c = 35.75
      d = 0.4275

      v16 = windspeed ** 0.16
      wci = a + (b * temp) - (c * v16) + (d * temp * v16)
      return wci
   ```
   
   To indicate a function in python you type `def` for define, the name of your function, and then in parenthesis the input arguments of that function, followed by a colon. On the next lines tab-indented is the code of your function, and your return value.

   Here is your first introduction math operators in Python. Addition, subtraction, and multiplication look much like you'd expect. A double astericks, `**`, indicates an exponential. A backslash, `/`, is for division, and a double backslash, `//`, is for integer division.
   
   And then let's compute a new list with `windchill` data at
   the bottom of `mysci.py`:
   
   ```python
   # Let's actually compute the wind chill factor
   windchill = []
   for temp, windspeed in zip(data['tempout'], data['windspeed']):
       windchill.append(compute_windchill(temp, windspeed))
   ```
   
   Now we'll call our function. Initialize a list for wind chill with empty square brackets, `[]`. And in a `for` loop, loop through our temperature and wind speed data, applying the function to each `tuple` data pair. `tuple`s are ordered like `list`s, but they are indicated by parenthesis, `()`, instead of square brackets and cannot be changed or appended. `tuple`s are generally faster than `list`s.
   
   We use the `zip` function in Python to automatically unravel the `tuple`s. Take a look at `zip([1,2], [3,4,5])`.  What is the result?

   And finally, add a `DEBUG` section to see the
   results:
   
   ```python
   # DEBUG
   print(windchill)
   ```

41. [git] Clean up, stage, and commit (`git commit -m "Compute wind chill factor"`)

42. [python] Now, the wind chill factor is actually in the data file,
   so we can read it from the file and compare that value to our computed
   values.  To do this, we need to read the `windchill` from column 12 as a `float`:
   Edit the columns and types dictionaries:

   ```python
   columns = {'date': 0, 'time': 1, 'tempout': 2, 'windspeed': 7,
              'windchill': 12}
   ```
   
   **NOTE:** the line continuation indentation
   
   and
   
   ```python
   types = {'tempout': float, 'windspeed': float, 'windchill': float}
   ```
   
   Then, in a `DEBUG` section at the end of your script to compare the two
   different values (from `data` and computed by our function):
   
   ```python
   # DEBUG
   for wc_data, wc_comp in zip(data['windchill'], windchill):
       print(f'{wc_data:.5f}   {wc_comp:.5f}   {wc_data - wc_comp:.5f}')
   ```
   
   If we use `f-strings` with `float` formatting we can determine how many decimal places we want to print our answer to. `.5f` means we want 5 places after the decimal point. 
   
   Test the results.  What do you see?  Our computation isn't very good
   is it?

43. [git] Clean up, stage, and commit (`git commit -m "Compare wind chill factors"`)

Clean up, stage, and commit.

44. [python] Now, let's format the output so that it's easy to understand and
   rename this script to something indicative of what it actually does.
   
   To the end of the file, let's add:
   
   ```python
   # Output comparison of data
   print('                ORIGINAL  COMPUTED')
   print(' DATE    TIME  WINDCHILL WINDCHILL DIFFERENCE')
   print('------- ------ --------- --------- ----------')
   for date, time, wc_orig, wc_comp in zip(data['date'], data['time'], data['windchill'], windchill):
       print(f'{date} {time:>6} {wc_orig:9.6f} {wc_comp:9.6f} {wc_orig-wc_comp:10.6f}')
   ```
   
   **NOTE:** Introduces f-string formatting of strings, `zip` with more than 2 arguments
   and more `float` formating options.
   
   You now have your first complete Python script!  Let's write another...

Now, let's format the output via print statements so that it's easy to understand. Here we'll use f-string formatting with more `float` formatting options.

45. [git] DON'T CLEAN UP!  Just stage and commit
   (`git commit -m "Output formatting comparison data"`)


46. [git] Let's rename this script to something meaningful.

   ```bash
   $ git mv mysci.py windchillcomp.py
   $ git commit -m "Renaming first script"
   ```

Let's rename the script to something more meaningful using `git mv`
Contrats you have your first Python script!
Tomorrow we'll write another.

47. [git] Let's push to GitHub!
