Python 0-30 for Scientists
==========================

This is intended to pick off right where part 1a left off - 
you had just commited your new script file that reads in the 
data from file as a string.

Part 1b - First Python Script Cont
--------------------------------------

26. [python] One big string isn't very useful, so parse
   the data file into a data structure you can use.  
   Change the `mysci.py` script to read:
   
   ```python
   # Initialize my data variable
   data = []
   
   # Read and parse the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:
   
       # Read the first three lines (header)
       for _ in range(3):
           datafile.readline()
       
       # Read and parse the rest of the file
       for line in datafile:
            datum = line.split()
            data.append(datum)
   
   # DEBUG
   for datum in data:
      print(datum)
   ```

   The first thing that is different in this script is an 
   initialized data variable; `data = []` creates the variable 
   `data` as an empty `list` which we will populate as we read 
   the file. Python `lists` are a collection data type that 
   are ordered and changeable - meaning you can call 
   information out of the `list` by its index and you can add 
   or delete elements to your `list`. Lists are denoted by 
   square brackets, `[]`.

   Then with the datafile open for reading capabilities, we 
   are going to write two separate `for` loops. A `for` loop 
   is used for iterating over a sequence (such as a `list`). 
   It is important to note the syntax of Python `for` loops: 
   the `:` at the end of for `for` line, the tab-indentation 
   of all lines within the `for` loop, and perhaps the absence 
   of an `end for` that is found in languages such as Matlab.

   In your first `for` loop, loop through the dummy variable 
   `_` in `range(3)`. `range` returns a sequence of numbers, 
   starting at 0 and incrementing by 1 (by default), 
   ending at the specified length. Here if you were to 
   `print(_)` on each line of the `for` loop you would see:

   0
   1
   2

   Try it out if you are unsure of how this works. Here the 
   `_` variable is a placeholder, meaning the variable is 
   never called within the loop. 

   So again, in the first `for` loop, you execute the 
   `readline` command (which you will remember moves down to 
   the next line each time it is consecutively called) 3 times 
   to read through the file header (which is 3 lines long). 
   You have just written your first `for` loop! 

   Then in a second `for` loop, you loop through lines in the 
   remainder of your `datafile`. On each line, `split` it 
   along white space. The string `split()` method splits a 
   string into a list on a specified separator, the default 
   being white space. You could use any character you like, 
   but other useful options are `/t ` for splitting along 
   tabs, or `,` along commmas. 

   Then you `append` this split line list to the end of your 
   `data` list. The list `append()` method adds a single item 
   to the end of your list. After every `line` in your `for` 
   loop iteration, the `data` list that was empty is one 
   element longer. Now we have a list of lists for our data 
   variable - a list of the data in each line for multiple 
   lines.

   When you print each datum in data, you'll see that each 
   datum is a list of string values.

   We just covered a lot of Python nuances in a very little 
   bit a code! So please reach out 
   if you are confused at this step.

27. [python] Now, to practice list indexing, 
   get the first, 10th, and last row in `data`.  
   Change the `DEBUG` section of our `mysci.py` script to:
   
   ```python
   # DEBUG
   print(data[0])
   print(data[9])
   print(data[-1])
   ```

   Index your `list` by adding the number of your index in 
   square brackets, `[]`, after the name of the `list`. 
   Python is 0-indexed so `data[0]` refers to the first 
   index and `[-1]` refers to the last index. 

28. [python] Now, to practice slice indexing,
   get the first 10 rows in `data`.  
   Change the `DEBUG` section of our `mysci.py` script to:
   
   ```python
   # DEBUG
   for datum in data[0:10]:
       print(datum)
   ```

   Using a colon, `:`, between two index integers a and b, 
   you get all indexes between a and b. 
   See what happens when you print `data[:10]`, `data[0:10:2]`, 
   and `data[slice(0,10,2)]`.  
   What's the difference?

29. [python] Now, to practice nested indexing,
   get the 5th, first 5, and every other *column*
   of rows `8` in `data`.
   Change the `DEBUG` section of the `mysci.py` script to:
   
   ```python
   # DEBUG
   print(data[8][4])
   print(data[8][:5])
   print(data[8][::2])
   ```

   In nested list indexing, the first index determines the 
   row, and the second determines the element from that row. 
   Also try printing `data[5:8][4]`, why doesn't this work?

30. [git] Clean up the file (remove `DEBUG` section), stage 
   the changes, and commit. (i.e., `git add mysci.py` and 
   `git commit -m "Parsing file"`)

31. [python] Can you remember which column is which?  Is time 
   the first column or the second?  Which column is the 
   temperature?
   
   Each column is a time-series of data.  We would ideally 
   like each time-series easily accessible, which is *not* 
   the case when `data` is row-column ordered (like it 
   currently is).  (Remember what happens when you try to do 
   something like `data[:][4]`!)
   
   Let's get our data into a more convenient named-column 
   format.
   Change `mysci.py` to the following:

   ```python
   # Initialize my data variable
   data = {'date': [],
           'time': [],
           'tempout': []}
   
   # Read and parse the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:
   
       # Read the first three lines (header)
       for _ in range(3):
           datafile.readline()
       
       # Read and parse the rest of the file
       for line in datafile:
           split_line = line.split()
           data['date'].append(split_line[0])
           data['time'].append(split_line[1])
           data['tempout'].append(split_line[2])
   
   # DEBUG
   print(data['time'])
   ```

   First we'll initialize a `dict`, indicated by the curly 
   brackets, `{}`. Dictionaries, like `list`s, are changeable, 
   but they are unordered. They have `keys`, rather than 
   positions, to point to their elements. Here you have 
   created 3 elements of your dictionary, all currently empty 
   `lists`, and specified by the keys `date`, `time`, and 
   `tempout`. Keys act similarly to indexes: to pull out the 
   `tempout` element from `data` you would type 
   `data['tempout']`.

   Grab date (the first column of each line), time (the second 
   column of each line), and temperature data (the third 
   column), from each line and `append` it to the list 
   associated with each of these data variables.

32. [git] Clean up (remove `DEBUG` section), stage, and commit
   (`git commit -m "Parsing select time-series"`)

33. [python] Now it's easy to get the time-series information
   for each column that we are interested in grabbing, and we
   can get each column by name.  However, everything read from
   the text file is a `str`.  What if we want to do math on this
   data, then we need it to be a different data type!
   
   So, let's convert the `tempout` time-series to be a `float`
   by changing the line:
   
   ```python
           data['tempout'].append(split_line[2])   
   ```
   
   to:
   
   ```python
           data['tempout'].append(float(split_line[2]))
   ```

   The `float` datatype refers to floating point real values - 
   the datatype of any numbers with values after a decimal point. 
   You could also change the datatype to `int`, which will 
   round the values down to the closest full integer.

34. [python] Add a `DEBUG` section at the end and see what
   `data['tempout']` now looks like.  Do you see a difference?
   It should now be a `list` of `float`s.

35. [git] Clean up (remove `DEBUG` section), stage, and commit
   (`git commit -m "Converting tempout to floats"`)

36. [python] This seems great, so far!  But what if you want to
   read more columns to our data later?  You would have to change
   the initialization of the `data` variable (at the top of 
   `mysci.py`) *and* have to add the appropriate line
   in the "read and parse" section.  Essentially, that means
   you need to maintain 2 parts of the code and make sure that
   both remain consistent with each other.
   
   This is generally not good practice.  Ideally, you want to
   be able to change only 1 part of the code and know that
   the rest of the code will remain consistent.  So, let's fix
   this.
   
   Change `mysci.py` to:
   
   ```python
   # Column names and column indices to read
   columns = {'date': 0, 'time': 1, 'tempout': 2}

   # Data types for each column (only if non-string)
   types = {'tempout': float}

   # Initialize my data variable
   data = {}
   for column in columns:
       data[column] = []

   # Read and parse the data file
   filename = "data/wxobs20170821.txt"
   with open(filename, 'r') as datafile:

       # Read the first three lines (header)
       for _ in range(3):
           datafile.readline()

       # Read and parse the rest of the file
       for line in datafile:
           split_line = line.split()
           for column in columns:
               i = columns[column]
               t = types.get(column, str)
               value = t(split_line[i])
               data[column].append(value)

   # DEBUG
   print(data['tempout'])
   ```
   You have now created a `columns` dictionary that points each 
   data variable to its column-index. And a `types` dictionary, 
   that indicates what type to convert the data when necessary. 
   When you want new variables pulled out of the datafile, 
   change these two variables.

   Initializing the `data` dictionary now includes a `for` 
   loop, where for each variable specified in `columns` that 
   key is initialized pointing to an empty list. This is the 
   first time you have looped over a `dict` and added 
   key-value pairs to a `dict` via assignment.

   When reading and parsing the file, you created your first 
   nested `for` loop. For every line of the datafile, split 
   that line - and then for every desired variable in the 
   `columns` dictionary (`date`, `time`, `tempout`): grab the 
   datum from the current split line with the specified index 
   (`0`, `1`, `2`), use the `dict.get()` method to find the 
   desired datatype if specired (avoiding key-not-found 
   errors and defaulting to `str` if unspecified), convert 
   the datum to the desired datatype, and append the datum 
   to the `list` associated with each `column` key within the 
   `data` dictionary.

37. [git] Clean up (remove `DEBUG` section), stage, and commit
   (`git commit -m "Refactoring data parsing code"`)

==========================

That concludes the second lesson of this virtual tutorial. 

You should now be familiar with lists and list indexing, 
dictionaries and their keys, ranges, for-loops, floats, and 
the Python commands split, append, and get. 

Please continue to part 1c.